---
title: Software_source
description: 
published: true
date: 2022-07-06T03:33:32.025Z
tags: 
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2022-04-21T03:57:17.113Z
---

## Summary

&emsp; Software sources refers to the repositories that are used to store various Linux applications, including free or non-free software. There are several types of repositories:

- Network repository: binaries and source code from a server
- ISO repository: ISO files from distributions
- Local repository: directories that contain software packages.

Take official repository of deepin : [https://community-packages.deepin.com/deepin/](https://community-packages.deepin.com/deepin/) 

for example:

- pool/    directory contains all released packages
- archives/    contains resources used by developper

&emsp; In order to provide faster and stable repositories for user, deepin has created new mirrors of its official repository. There are more than 100 mirrror sites, covering 35 countries all over the world.

## Source configuration

&emsp; Deepin system inherits apt utility from debian. apt is a powerful tool for searching, installing, upgrading and removing software obtained from repository. Other Linux distributions, like Red Hat or Gentoo, use their own tools which have the similar functions.
&emsp; The default configuration of source for deepin is "/etc/apt/sources.list", which contains the web address of description of each software packages.

To view current configurations of source, execute in terminal:

```
$ cat /etc/apt/sources.list
```   

The default content is like:

```
## Generated by deepin-installer
deb https://community-packages.deepin.com/deepin/ apricot main contrib non-free
#deb-src https://community-packages.deepin.com/deepin/ apricot main contrib non-free
```   

The first word of each line, either "deb" or "deb-src", describe the type of the repository:

- **deb:** Repository of binary packges, i.e. pre-compiled package ready to be used
- **deb-src:** Repository of source code packages, as well as package description (.dsc) and changes made to source code (.diff.gz).

## Change software source

There are two ways of modifying source:

1. Launch control center panel -> Update -> Update settings -> Closed Intelligent Mirror Source -> Mirror Source list -> Switch Mirror, then choose your prefered source.

2. Modify configuration file manually (only when you have fully understood its mechanism):
```
    sudo deepin-edit  /etc/apt/sources.list
    
```

After modification, update local cache of software source:

```
    sudo apt-get update
    
```

## How to provide a mirror for deepin repository ?

&emsp; If you would like to offer a repository mirror to deepin users, please refer following instructions,and make sure that you have enough disk space.

| Synchronization command	| Space needed |
| :--- | :--- |
| rsync -av --delete-after rsync.deepin.com::deepin/ /var/www/deepin/ | 189GB |
| rsync -av --delete-after rsync.deepin.com::releases/ /var/www/deepin-cd/ | 10GB |

※ Note:

- You can move the /var/www/ path in the above addresses to the server root directory;
- Please add a cron job running every day, so as to keep deepin mirror you provided in the newest available state over a long period of time ;
- We suggest you synchronize deepin package repository first, and then synchronize deepin ISO repository;
- Please do not save other files in the directories related to deepin mirrors (such as unofficial packages) to avoid misunderstanding;
- If you have any suggestions and comments, please give us feedback to support@deepin.com.

## Reference

[Deepin OS Mirrors Source List ](https://www.deepin.org/en/mirrors/packages/)
